this guy is hands down one of the
shadiest characters in modern chinese
history
or certainly from the period leading up
to the establishment of the people's
republic in 1949
he's not a very well-known figure in the
pantheon of chinese leaders
other than the cognoscenti of chinese
history you'd be hard-pressed to find
someone who knew who this guy was
he's best known as the father of china's
secret police or more accurately the
chinese communist party's secret police
he's also called the godfather of the
cultural revolution
so i guess if you had to tag him with
something bite-sized and simple you
could put it that way
in this podcast we'll examine this guy's
life it's a fascinating life as depraved
and sinister as it was
more important than being the father of
china's secret police he was a very
close confidant of chairman mao and kang
shang was there at every critical moment
whenever mao would
do all the things he would do that
ultimately resulted in
mass death or misery for thousands and
millions and tens of millions
blamed for the most egregious of
blunders lies squarely with chairman mao
you could just consider kang sheng as a
dark figure like a bad angel
standing on the chairman's shoulder who
had mao's ear
and whispered all the right things that
just egged the chairman on and justified
mao's outrageous ideas
he was mao's henchman for sure and he
did mao's dirty work with sadistic
pleasure
when he was running the secret police in
the 30s and 40s he had the goods on
everybody
and with all this information mao knew
how to utilize him to keep an eye on his
rivals and make sure
no one wasn't following anything except
the party line
mao's party line i cannot emphasize
enough what a special and
unique relationship these two kindred
spirits had
i use this book i bought in hong kong
when i was living out there back in the
90s it's called the claws of the dragon
kang the evil genius behind mao and his
legacy of terror in the people
in people's china long title the authors
were john
byron and robert peck like i do with all
podcasts i use titles from my own
personal library
the google and google books which is
always good for locating hard to find
sources about ancient china
they summed up kong he was a cold
self-possessed manipulator who fused
refinement
and intellectual sensibilities with the
criminal delight of a renaissance
princeling of the arts
of inflicting agony and destruction
and if you lined up kung shung with
seven other chinese and someone asked
you to pick out the sleazy secret police
chief
a hundred out of a hundred would pick
kong chun he had this
this high forehead sort of receding
hairline long face
full lips and he had three other things
about his appearance that were his
trademark
he had these round tortoise shell
glasses and he
was always impeccably presented and to
top it all off he had this david niven
or brad pitt's character aldo rain of
inglorious bastards fame
spot on mustache that just gave his
total visage a
sadistic and disturbing kind of
countenance
let's look at the life of kangshan
kangshan was a
shandong ren that is he hailed from
shandong province up in the north the
province where qingdao is located of the
famous qingdao bear he was born in 1898
which was one of those many terrible
times in china
when the place was in decline and there
were pockets of chaos
everywhere there were only thirteen more
years
left in what became the last dynasty of
imperial china
kangshan came from money his father was
a rich
landowner and kong grew up comfortably
in a place called
da tai chuang about 50 miles southwest
of qingdao
he had a lot of name changes before he
settled on kong shang
he was born as zhang zhong ku
he was brought up in the traditional
confucian style and was given a very
decent education
he married in 1916 in a typical chinese
arranged marriage to the daughter of a
nearby landlord
she had bound feet and was totally not
what you would call a modern woman
they had two kids but divorced in 1924.
that was a big year for kung shung so it
was only fitting that 1924 was the heir
of the rat
that was the year that he joined the
chinese communist party
formed in shanghai three years prior
i also read accounts that he also joined
in 1925.
by that time he had already changed his
name two times
going from chiang jong ku to chang yu
shin and then
chiang shuping he mostly served as a
labor
organizer in shanghai and also handled a
few other
tasks and missions he had made his way
down there to attend shanghai university
which
had some kind of affiliation or
something with the high school he
attended back in shandong
what berkeley was to the mid 60s counter
culture shanghai university was to
radical chinese politics in the 1920s
and 30s
so this was the vehicle that carried him
from landed gentry to become a hardcore
communist
on april 12 1927 the infamous green gang
or
qingbang as they were known turned on
all the communists
in shanghai chiang kai-shek wanted to
eradicate this communist problem down in
shanghai and
pull this weed out by the roots early
they were starting to take hold and
zheng wanted to stop them before they
got too powerful so he talked to the
boss of the green gang
do you aka big air do
and strikes a deal with him and the
white terror commences and about 5 000
or so communists and communist
sympathizers
got theirs shanghai was the world
capital of the great vices of drugs
gambling and prostitution among others
and the green gang ran
all that so chiang kai-shek used this
criminal organization to go after his
increasingly more powerful communist
enemies
and big geared dew did a swell job his
gang fanned out
across shanghai and just butchered these
communists and whoever didn't get killed
was arrested and
thrown in prison and no doubt tortured
the party up till then operated rather
openly but after the white terror the
movement and all its leaders got driven
underground
that same year kung shung married tao
yeo
this marriage lasted till kang's death
and although i won't get into it in this
podcast she was a
lifelong ally and supporter of her
husband and they were true soul mates
the next year after they married 1928
kung
changed his name ag yet again this time
to jauron
he and how you lived the good life in
shanghai
kang worked for some rich capitalist by
day and was an underground communist
operative at night
working his way slowly and steadily up
the ladder
1931 was another in a number of pivotal
years for kung shung
the communist party's chief of security
was a former green gang member named
gush
he got himself arrested by the kmt and
in that year
kung sheng filled the void and became
the head of the chinese communist party
secret police
he had established his credentials to
the extent that by 1933
he went with a ccp delegation to moscow
this was the group that represented the
chinese communist party at the common
turn or the communist international
this was the group led by the soviets of
course that was sort of a world congress
of communist parties
chinese delegation was led by wang ming
a hardcore supporter of the soviet style
of communist theory
and organization he was an early rival
of mao but
a close associate of kung 1934
kang was still in moscow and got himself
elected to the central committee and
politburo of the
chinese communist party in russia
khan shang had himself a front row seat
to all the wretched ways of the secret
police and
how to spread terror and its many uses
and growing the party and the
political power of those who wielded the
power of terror
the soviets were the kings of this so
kang learned from the best and
when he went back to china almost four
years later in november 1937
he had picked up a lot of intimate and
useful knowledge about how to destroy
the lives of people
by 1937 the chinese communist leadership
was living up in yemen
located in shanxi province this was
where they ended up after the long march
that had begun in
jiangxi province in 1934.
during the period of the long march the
historic event that really solidified
the chinese communists and established
mao zedong
as the leader kung chung was in russia
so he missed out on that pivotal event
in chinese history
and arrived at the base camp set up in
yemen with wang ming
and the others who had been part of
china's group at the common turn
wang ming posed a serious threat to
mao's leadership
kang was at this time loyal to wang but
he ended up becoming one of the first in
a long list of communist party leaders
that felt the
insertion of kung's knife between their
shoulder blades
in fact kang at one time or another
pretty much turned on every single major
leader except mao
kang was extremely useful for ma when he
arrived in yemen
he had a complete package of uses that
mao needed to consolidate his power
there were seven things about kangchang
in 1937 that mao realized were very
important to him
first of all he was very close to wang
ming and wong's russian faction of the
communist party and he had all the
necessary secrets on wang and
all of his close associates kang also
spoke russian which mao did not
he also had all this experience living
in russia and was as much of an expert
on which way the winds were blowing as
anyone who spent four years there
at yen on kang was considered a true
expert in communist theory
the fifth thing about kang that mao nu
was going to be absolutely essential was
kung's mastery of how to operate a
secret police force
and use it as a means of terror against
suspected enemies
then there was the sixth and seventh
aspects about kung shung that tied him
close to mao for the rest of his life
if kang hadn't been a secret police
chief he probably would have been a
scholar
devoting himself to the pursuits of a
confucian gentleman
he was very educated in chinese poetry
painting art history and philosophy all
the things that mao was passionate about
his whole life
so kang and mao shared this passion that
sort of formed a bond between the two
but nothing super glued that mao kang
bond
more than the introduction kang made to
mao in 1938
of a 24 year old shanghai movie actress
born as li shumang
she was a young lady of a very dubious
past littered with all the detritus one
would come to expect from
someone living the bohemian life of 1920
shanghai movies she was known as lanping
in the movies and gave up this life and
lifestyle to join the revolution she
moved her way up to yemen in 1938 and
caused quite a sensation from the start
she was also from shandong province and
actually knew kangshan
i don't know whether it's true or not
but when she was a young teenager it
said that she was a mistress
of kangshan or that they had some kind
of torrent affair
so they gravitated towards each other up
in yenhan
mao had an eye for the ladies his whole
life and this glamorous
shanghai actress with the dubious
reputation caught his eye
and his interest at once she was of
course the infamous
fodder for a future podcast for sure mao
was still married at the time to his
third wife
she was a revolutionary with a good
background so after chiang ching arrived
in yemen in august 1937
mao started to openly carry on with her
there was understandably quite a bit of
resistance from the other leaders about
this
after all he was married to a good woman
with an excellent background in the
party and this jiang ching not only had
this
totally bourgeois background as a movie
actress but also was rumored to have had
a whole string of affairs and lovers
even worse she had been imprisoned by
the kmt and was suspected very strongly
of being a kmt
spy but kang shun knew that in chiang
ching
he had a very special ally and if he
could
somehow be instrumental in forging this
mao jiang qing romance
they could do nothing except help them
politically so he played an early role
in encouraging and cultivating mao's
relationship with jiang qing
kang knew the value of playing the role
of the
junto fung this this translates to
pillow wind or
wind on the pillow in english we may
call it pillow talk
kung chung for one knew the value of
having a close ally beholden to him
personally
who was also betting down each night
with the top guy in the party
and the whole movement by the summer of
mao is very much carrying on openly with
jiang ching
the vocal opposition to this was strong
but kong used his nefarious ways to
sanitize her past
record and clean it up a bit in front of
the cadres who were grumbling about her
he vouched for her background and
revolutionary credentials
in short kang chung did what he did and
once the upper crust of the party in
yemen
had been placated enough and assured she
was not as poisonous as they imagined
she moved in with mao and he was given a
divorce from
but mao had to famously swear that jung
ching
would never be involved in politics or
party affairs
and furthermore would stay out of the
public eye other than becoming a
personal assistant tomorrow
jiang ching didn't hold any leadership
posts kang
had successfully come to mao's aid in
this personal matter
and earned not only lifelong gratitude
from the chairman but from chiang ching
as well even almost to his dying day
it was said that jeong ching who
respected nobody
showed kong shang the greatest deference
and even at her most powerful during her
gang of four days
she always called him kangla which in
the
chinese system of etiquette is about as
respectful as you can get
la means old or venerable so by putting
that law
particle after his surname it was a very
respectful way to address someone in the
chinese language sort of like saying
venerable kang
okay enough said about chiang ching from
this point forward
kang pretty much threw in his lot with
mao
up till now he had been part of the wong
ming soviet faction that showed great
loyalty to the soviets and
treated them as the elder brother in
their unholy alliance
so wang ming became another leader who
felt kong's knife in his
back as i said and he gave ma all the
assistance necessary to overthrow wang
ming
and his entire faction kang was amply
rewarded and was made the chief of the
communist party secret service in 1938
at that time it basically consisted of
the two most powerful most
feared most dreaded organs of security
first was the innocuous sounding social
affairs department and the other was the
military intelligence department
by 1939 kung is constantly at mao's side
and surely relished the role as the
ultimate insider
the closer you were to mao zedong the
more powerful and influential you became
so kang came to miles aid at a vital
time and also sufficiently backstabbed
wang ming enough to get back in mao's
good graces
as i mentioned outside of party affairs
mao and kang
both shared a passion for the classical
chinese arts of calligraphy
poetry and painting mao even used to
call kang
his his one word teacher
who with a single chinese character
could provide the final polishing of
mao's writing
by 1942 kang had totally turned his back
on the soviets and his politics were
very anti-soviet from that point forward
and being as close to mao as he was it
is surely certain that he fanned the
flames of mao's deepening suspicion of
his
one-time communist big brother to the
north
these were the years in 1939 40 41 42
when there was just a reign of quiet
terror going on all the time
everyone was always uneasy about the
prospects of being interrogated or
having their past or their communist
stripes questioned
these were the years where kang
established himself as such a
hated figure in the party upper echelons
no one would mess with him because not
only was he the secret police chief and
a ruthless double-crossing one at that
he was also one of mao's favorites so
challenging kung chung was never
recommended
and everyone kept their distance but he
was a very unloved leader
as i guess all these secret uh police
chiefs are
1942 1943 the first party cleansing
campaign took place
this was the infamous rectification
campaign
or this was the first time the party
ever cannibalized itself in a big way
it was a terrible reign of terror and
mao went after all his enemies or anyone
who wasn't supportive of him or his ways
of seeing things
this was sort of a precursor of the 1957
anti-writers campaign when mao went
after the real and imagined enemies that
squeaked by the rectification campaign
but all good things come to an end and
they came to an end for kong chung in
late 1945
when he was out maneuvered by his most
powerful rivals and
mao removed him as head of the social
affairs and from the military
intelligence departments he might have
fallen from power but his brutal methods
and ways
definitely survived him he was still
close to mao and one of mao's intimates
but the tide was turning in the civil
war against chiang kai-shek and the kmt
mao was getting more and more powerful
and there were many others competing for
mao's attention and favor
by 1947 everyone had to scatter when in
march the kmt forces took control of yen
han
kang by that time had been put in charge
of mao's land reform program
and had been enthusiastically vicious
with any and all manners of landlords
and rich peasants
despite all the outcry at the violent
and unnecessarily repressive actions
carried out with kong's orders and
leadership
mao still backed him those years from
1946 to 1949 were not good years to be a
landlord
mao next made kang the party chief of
shandong province
now normally anyone would have been
overjoyed at holding this provincial
shooji position but not kangshan
all the action was in beijing not in the
provinces he was
put in charge of his old native province
in august of 1949
two months before mao stood on the
podium at tiananmen
and declared the chinese people had
stood up
well for the next 20 years kang was
still an insider but was far removed
from any significant leadership role
whatever comrades had managed to survive
the rectification campaign
and all the skull duggary that went on
during the yen on period
went on to build the new china kong
removed himself from
everything and declared himself ill and
lived like an invalid in a qingdao villa
where he hung out
lived the life of a traditional
confucian gentleman and got stoned on
opium constantly
he was said to have been a long time
opium smoker and in fact was known to
linpyal
and his gang as old opium pipe
it was sort of a well-known secret at
the time and totally fit his shady
character
he remained uh almost totally inactive
for the next six years seeing no one and
not involving himself in any party work
and not making any public appearances
and as if his life wasn't enough of a
film noir he had been having this affair
with his wife
uh tau younger sister sumai
this menage a trois like kang's opium
habit was another famous well-known
secret in the party
sumai ended up jumping off a building in
may 1950 but survived
and kang had to pull a bunch of levers
to do a little work to
cover this suicide attempt up but she
ended up later committing suicide in
april 1967 when the
cultural revolution was at a full boil
she odd on barbiturates and died alone
in her beijing apartment
kangchang makes somewhat of a comeback
in 1955.
by this time he had been sidelined for
so long and had played no role
whatsoever in building the new nation
even many of his subordinates have had
passed him by
he started to do some party work he made
his return at the 1956 session of the
chinese people's political consultative
conference or cppcc
the party general office gave him this
nice mansion on small stone bridge lane
just northwest of the drum tower in
beijing
he continued to live the life of a
scholarly official and continued his
great passion
for collecting fine chinese art he lived
in this home until the day
he died it's still there today and it's
called the bamboo garden hotel now
it wasn't much of a comeback uh for kong
shang because in september 1956 he was
demoted and made only an
alternate member of the pollock bureau
and his ranking in the party's pecking
order slipped from number six to number
22.
there was much going on in kong's life
during this period
he backed mao to the hilt during the
great leap forward
and was as much of a cheerleader for mao
for this political disaster as he was
for mao's
encore to the great leap forward known
as the cultural revolution
kang played a key role in skewering
panda hawaii
after he got and wrote his private
letter to mao expressing his reservation
about the
excesses of the great leap forward
kang's unswerving support during the
great leap forward when so many leaders
wouldn't display the enthusiasm that mao
hoped for
put him much more in mao's good graces
in 1963 kang was up in moscow with deng
xiaoping to
handle the matter of sino-soviet
relations
he did his best to combine his russian
expertise with his anti-russian
sentiments and
made sure the split between russia and
china was total
then in 1965 came his big break
beijing's popular vice mayor wu han
writes a play called
it's all about this forthright and
honest ming dynasty official named
hai rei who was unjustly imprisoned for
criticizing the ming
emperor sounds innocent enough right
this spark ignited the cultural
revolution
kang and other like-minded troublemakers
played with mao's sensitivities and
explained
how hi-ray was actually panda hai
and the emperor was maul and this whole
play was nothing more than a criticism
of mao's policies
mao saw a conspiracy against him behind
every bush and kong and other shoe
shiners
whispered in his air and told him how
right he was
others at the top layers of power
dismissed this notion
and defended wuhan for the attacks
against him and his play
november 10th 1965 comes along and
yahweh yen
writes the scathing critique of the play
and its author in shanghai's wen hue
bom the party newspaper there by openly
attacking
mayor wuhan he was doing a classic
this means to point at the mulberry but
to curse the locust tree
it's an old chinese saying to point at
one thing and say how bad it is but
actually attacking something else
differently
wuhan was under attack but the real
target was the entire beijing leadership
kang was really in his element here
yahwen jen by the way went on to hold a
stake in the gang of four and was one of
the most ruthless and violent radicals
during the gang of four's reign of
terror
mao threw in his lot with the radicals
and turned on his comrades who had been
with him since the 1920s and 30s
kong had mao's backing and once he had
made quick work of party elders like
pang jun
yangshan he turned to other targets
june 18 1966 real violence breaks out at
beijing university and students turn on
teachers in the university
administration
kang worked feverishly behind the scenes
fanning the flames of this radical
behavior
and when mao wrote his first thots ball
or big character poster
and said to bombard the party
headquarters there was no
turning back august 18th 1966
the first of many red guard parades took
place
this time kung chung was right up there
standing next to mao
on tienen men's viewing podium as
people's lives were ruined or turned
upside down
like the nazis before him kang sucked up
all kinds of treasures and
art from those unfortunate enough to get
caught up in the chaos that he sponsored
and manipulated
at this time kong is still enjoying his
opium habits so you can imagine the
constant high he must have been on near
the peak of his powers and
high on a narcotic drug he did much of
mao's dirty work going after enemies and
taking charge of witch hunts
at the ninth party congress he's really
at his peak and is made a member of the
standing committee of the party
he continued to go after any and all
real and imagined enemies or anyone who
knew about his sleazy past i could
possibly embarrass him
but kong chung's luck ran out for good
in 1970
when in november he was diagnosed with
cancer of the colon
he lived another five years but it
ravaged him pretty bad
he still remained powerful in the first
years of the seventies
by this time he was known by all as yen
wang
or the king of hell 1972 rolls around
and the worst of the cultural revolution
is over
chairman mao meets with nixon and
there's a breath of fresh air in the
wind after this intense
dark age that fell over china
mao wasn't in good shape by this time
either in his last few years were very
touch and go kang
knew that once mao left this world to
meet
marx his one benefactor disappeared and
it was only a matter of time before he
was attacked and
his legacy trampled on so he reached out
to the one person he had known longer
than all others
good old chiang ching madame mao by this
time was taking full advantage of her
prestige as the
wife of the chairman who by this time
had turned into sort of a demigod
the more mao's health declined the
bolder jung-ching
became and kang was there once again
pulling all the strings and manipulating
things behind the scenes to build her up
and him with her then came the 10th
party congress in
august 1973. in addition to membership
of the standing committee of the
politburo
kung was also made vice chairman of the
standing committee of the national
people's congress
he was also put in charge of the
organization department as an official
position
he's dying at this point and although
still powerful he was not in any
physical condition to do as much damage
as
he had done in the past when he had
great power and influence
the end came for kung sheng in 1975.
first mao openly rebuked zhang ching in
may of 1975
and seals her fate and foils kung's plan
to use ching as an emperor's dowager
figure that
would ensure his political legacy and
once mao turned on chiang ching
kang of course turned on her too his
final betrayal
december 16 1975 just after six in the
morning
kang shang breathed his last
a man who caused countless chinese to
suffer the worst
death and pain and circumstances and who
aided and abetted mao zedong in the
worst of his excesses that caused the
death
and suffering of tens of millions of
chinese
despite this life of violence and
deception
kangshan lived to a relatively ripe old
age and died peacefully at his home
he received a state funeral and had his
ashes interned at
which was sort of an arlington national
cemetery kind of a place
except it wasn't limited to those who
served in the military
the whole politburo attended his funeral
except for maul
judah and joe and lai who were all too
frail to attend
mao died in september 1976 and the gang
of four were overthrown
soon thereafter kang shung's legacy was
given a once over
and his whole dark past was dredged up
and scrutinized
in november nineteen seventy eight party
secretary huyo bang
not yet at the peak of his power
attacked kang sheng by name in a fiery
speech
this led to official investigations that
uncovered more than enough dirt to
justify removing his ashes from the
papashan cemetery
and in the summer of nineteen eighty
kangshang's art collection was put on
display
internally and the extent of his
treachery was there for all to see
twelve thousand eighty rare books one
thousand
one hundred and two antiques and
artifacts
once it became safe to attack kong
everybody piled on and in 1980 kung
shung was posthumously expelled from the
communist party for having conspired
with the gang of four
encounter revolutionary activities i had
forgotten amongst all my books on china
in my library that i had dr leisure
sue's biography of chairman mao
he was mao's personal physician and
although not in any position in the
party
he was sort of a fly on the wall to a
lot of what happened in and around
chiang nanghai
the compound where most of china's
leaders lived back then
i'll close with a quote from his book i
usually try to avoid kang shang
sensing in him some deeper evil that i
could never fully explain
he had the look of deceit about him even
his photographs i think
convey an air of evil i associated him
with the dark side of the party
with all the dirty work that had to be
done delving into people's past
finding new enemies suggesting new
targets for attack
i did not want to be part of that nor
would mao have wanted me to be
so that's all i have for you today han
kang shang
quite a ghoul he was thanks for
listening if you've made it this far
that is
this is laszlo montgomery once again
wishing everyone a pleasant
farewell from claremont california 91711
home of the world renowned china project
at the center for
process studies at the claremont school
of theology
i hope we'll see you again next time for
another scintillating edition of the
china history podcast